JAM Chain Page (#5783)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-jam-chain.md

Unlike the current iterative approach, JAM will be introduced as a comprehensive singular upgrade.
Several factors contribute to this decision:

- A unified upgrade allows for precise restriction of post-upgrade actions, which is challenging
  with an iterative approach.
- It mitigates the constant stream of minor upgrades and breaking changes that occur regularly over
  weeks or months.

While this shift entails a significant breaking change, efforts will be made to minimize its impact
to manageable levels. Consolidating multiple smaller breaking changes into a single transition is
deemed preferable, introducing a novel blockchain concept that integrates various existing ideas in
a unique manner.

## A Rollup Chain

JAM will be a domain-specific chain, a chain that handles one particular domain of problems. In this
case, roll-ups, what Ethereum people might call optimistic roll-ups. JAM's rollups are heavily
bounded in terms of their security. This is what Polkadot has been doing for the last five years, it
is already a highly domain-specific roll-up chain. It's just got a little bit more opinionation than

> we want, and that is essentially what JAM fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is already a highly domain-specific roll-up chain. JAM essentially makes it less opinionated and more generic.
```

The JAM chain's job is to essentially provide the necessary apparatus to ensure that this output
correctly reflects the input when it goes through whatever transformation it's meant to have gone
through. Again, this is fairly basic stuff for what roll-ups are. What the JAM chain does is it
accepts outputs of roll-ups, of bits of computation that have been done already. So these bits of

> computation are done elsewhere, and then whatever data they yield is fed into the JAM chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The job of the JAM chain is to provide the necessary apparatus to ensure that the output
correctly reflects the input when it goes through the transformation it's meant to have undergone. The JAM chain 
accepts outputs of roll-ups, of bits of computation done elsewhere, and the data they yield is fed into the JAM chain.
```

The JAM chain is there to integrate the outputs of these computations into some shared state. So it
provides this shared state model, for integrating outputs together. We can see how Polkadot fits
into this model. But interestingly, we can see how other chains like what Ethereum is doing also fit

> into this model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JAM chain integrates the outputs of these computations into a shared state,
providing a shared state model similar to how Polkadot relay chain functions. 

```

## Smart Contract Similarity

JAM exhibits several similarities with a smart contract chain:

- Permissionless code execution occurs directly on the JAM chain itself.
- The state of the JAM chain is organized into distinct encapsulations.
- Alongside state, encapsulations encompass code and balance.

These encapsulations of state are termed **services**. Thus, the JAM state is partitioned into
services. The creation of a new service is permissionless, akin to deploying a smart contract on a
smart contract chain. Consequently, adding a new service to the JAM chain does not necessitate
approval from any authority or adherence to governance mechanisms, unlike Substrate-based chains
that mandate governance approval for adding new pallets. Services encompass code, balance, and
certain state components, resembling the structure commonly observed on a smart contract chain.

## Service Entry Points

> JAM services' code itself is split into three different entry points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JAM services' code is split into three different entry points:
```

- **Refine** is the function that does the mostly stateless computation. This is the bit that
  defines the transformation for the rollup for a specific service.
- **Accumulate** is the function that takes the output of that and folds it into the overall state
  of the service

> - **OnTransfer** handles information coming from other services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Refine** is the function that does the mostly stateless computation. It
  defines the transformation for the rollup for a specific service.
- **Accumulate** is the function that takes the output of that and folds it into the overall state
  of the service
- **OnTransfer** handles information coming from other services.
```

**Work packages** are the input to a service. Work packages can have many **work items** in them.
Every work item is associated with a service, and it reflects the actual input to the service. For
the parachains service, this is where you would put in the transactions, all that stuff to do with

> blockchain inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the parachains service, this is where the transactions and all of the blockchain inputs are entered.
```

The JAM security apparatus consists a two-stage processing where the Refine function accepts a work
item as an input and yields a work result as an output, which gets fed into the Accumulate function.
First Refine, then Accumulate. Work items are refined into work results, and therefore a work
package, which contains many work items, is refined into a **work report**, which is the
corresponding results of several items. A work package can be assigned that uses one core for one

> time slot, one six-second period of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
item as an input and yields a work result as an output, which gets fed into the Accumulate function (First Refine, then Accumulate.) Work items are refined into work results, and therefore, a work package containing many work items is refined into a **work report**, which is the
corresponding results of several items. A work package can be assigned that uses one core for a specific
time slot (typically a period of 6 seconds).
```

## JAM is Transactionless

> How does JAM differ from a smart contract chain? Well, it's **transactionless**. There are no
> transactions in JAM: Everything that is all permissionless input first goes through a Refine stage.
> So the service pre-refines all of the input that is transformed into these work reports, these sets
> of work results. And then those work results make their way actually onto the chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JAM fundamentally differs from a smart contract chain in the fact that it's **transactionless**. There are no
transactions in JAM: Everything is permissionless and the input first goes through a Refine stage.
So the service pre-refines all of the input that is transformed into these work reports, these sets
of work results. Then, those work results make their way onto the chain.
```
